Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricard Lobs. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Brian Talbot. He is
assistant professor at the University of Colorado Boulder. He
is the author of the End of Epistemology as
we know it. So, Doctor Talbot, welcome to the
show. It's a pleasure to everyone. Thank you. It's
great to be here. So, tell us first what's
behind uh this book, I mean, what motivated you
to write the book and what's basically the main
premise here? I mean, what do you mean exactly
by the end of Epistemology as we know it?
Uh I should say, you know, it's important, it's
important to have catchy titles, but a title doesn't
have to be strictly speaking. True to be a
good title. So, um so the title, so Epistemology
is like very roughly study of like, what we
should and shouldn't believe and why, why we shouldn't,
shouldn't believe it. Um Sort of what makes beliefs
better or worse or like more or less rational.
And um the, the title is sort of like
kind of a pun play on words because uh
in my opinion to determine like what we should
and shouldn't be uh believe we need to in
some sense, kind of think about what the, what
our goals are. Um So what is the end,
the, the, the thing at which we're aiming in
some sense, uh when we believe? And so I
think the book is an attempt to call into
question a lot of um views and in contemporary
and kind of historical standard epistemology sort of has
been done for a long time. I want to
call a lot of that into question, say we
need to do things very differently in many ways.
So at the end of epistemology, as we know
in that sense, but also it's about trying to
drive our thinking about what we shouldn't, shouldn't believe
um by thinking about what we're trying to accomplish
when we have beliefs. So it's, we're thinking about
epistemology by thinking about what are our goals first
and then deriving all the norms, all the rules
um in a sense from that. Um And what,
what I was thinking about, what motivated me to
write this book. I mean, there's so many things
and it takes so long to write a book.
And even before you start writing, there's so much
going on. So a lot to say, but uh
when I first started thinking about this stuff, years
and years and years ago, um so my research
at the time was on like the epistemology of
philosophy, like, how do we know roughly philosophical stuff?
Like, what is it that makes our beliefs about
philosophical questions reasonable? And that was a lot of
what my work was on. But my teaching was
really heavily about philosophy of law, political philosophy, um
and ethics. So I was thinking a lot about
um ethics and the law for my students. And
I was thinking a lot about philosophical methodology and
epistemology from my own research. And I was, uh
you know, in the ethics and the law, there's
a lot of thinking about uh the structure of
reasons and the structure of norms and rules and
what makes rules or norms better or worse. And
people thought a lot about that stuff and I
started applying some of that thinking from law and
ethics to work in epistemology that was trying to
explain what's so good about having uh reasonable beliefs.
And I just sort of felt like what people
were saying about um what makes belief reasonable and
why is it important to be reasonable? What people
were saying about that wasn't really matching up with
what they thought reasonableness was or reasonable belief was
or justified belief or knowledge. And there just seem
to be this mismatch, especially when you start thinking
about these things through the lens of law and,
and, and ethics where they really, I think more
a developed thought about um what makes norms or
rules, good norms or rules. And so I started
thinking there's just this mismatch and, um, what people,
yeah, what people were saying we need to pursue
the truth and that's what the, the, the, the
norms epistemology is about. But then what they said
the norms were, wasn't really well suited for the
pursuit of the truth. Uh And so, um, there's
a sort of a, a parable in the book
that I got from my friend Daniel is a
really nice, it's like a little story. So you
imagine, you know, you run into somebody and you're
talking to them and they say, oh, you know,
you're talking about their interests and they say, oh,
I really love books. Uh And I, and you
say back, oh, you love books. What's your favorite
book? And they say, oh, I don't, I don't
have a favorite book. I love every book. Exactly
the same as every other book. So I love,
you know, Windows 95 for dummies, this outdated book
on, on computer software. Exactly. As much as the
brothers K Matzo, this great work of literature. And
so you think this person doesn't really love books
or they don't love books in the right way,
or they don't love the right things about books.
And I really felt like that's what you were
seeing in, in epistemology. It was supposed to be
about the pursuit of the truth, but the way
the norms are structured and what you were allowed
to do and what was reasonable to do wasn't
always the stuff that was really aimed at pursuing
the truth and especially not aimed at pursuing the
important truths. Um And so I thought there's something
wrong going, there's something going on wrong here. And
I, that's why I started thinking about the material
in the book
and when it comes to these norms or could
you give us some examples of those epistemic norms?
I mean, when it comes to, uh, I don't
know, mainstream philosophy, is there a set of epistemic
norms that most philosophers tend to follow or not?
Yeah.
Um So here's a very, here's probably the least
controversial one. Don't contradict yourself. Mhm. So you don't
believe two things that are contradictory, that's a very
standard or you should, you know, you put, if
you want to put it as a should, you
shouldn't believe contradictory things. It's unreasonable to believe contradictory
things that's in, I think pretty much close to
universally accepted. Um If your evidence really clearly tells
you that something is false, you shouldn't believe that
that's a very widely held uh norm. Um More
generally, people think that you should believe what your
evidence tells you is true. Um It's fairly common,
although not universal for people to think. Um, DON'T
believe things you don't know, stuff like that. Um
But the, don't contradict yourself, believe what your evidence
tells. You don't believe what your evidence tells you
is false kind of stuff. Those are very, very
standard. Uh um Like the fact pretty close to
pretty close to universally accepted norms in epistemology.
But there's a very important question I think to
tackle here. So why is it that we should
even care about epistemic norms at all? I mean,
why do they matter at all to begin with?
So, um not everybody agrees on this question. Uh
I think everybody in epistemology. Well, yeah. So part
of the structure of the book is to consider
a range of different possible answers to that question.
And to think about, you know, I, I all
there's a bunch of answers to that question. I
think all are, are relatively plausible to some extent.
So here's an easy answer. Um, IF you have,
if you be the better your beliefs are the
more able you are to act well, right. If
your, if your beliefs are totally disconnected from reality,
you're not gonna be very successful in, in doing
the things you wanna do. That's a, that's a
pretty common view. So, um, epistemic norms are supposed
to be like rules or, or, uh, standards for
evaluating. Are you thinking? Well, uh And then if
you conform to those, you're more likely to be
able to act. Well, that's a pretty standard view,
but I don't think it's all just about action
and, and a lot of people, most people I
think probably don't think it's all about action. There's
things we're just curious about that. Don't have a
lot of like practical significance. Um So here's a,
so it's, it's hard to disentangle curiosity from practical
significance, but here's one I really would like to
know if there's intelligent life on other planets. Um,
BUT I'm never gonna meet any of those. If
there are, they are probably never going to meet
them but not gonna have any impact on what
I do, I suspect. But I would really like
to know. So I'm like, that's the thing I'm
genuinely curious about that. I don't have any think
has any practical significance. So, um often we think
to be curious is to want to know the
answer to a question very roughly. So uh we're
interested in the truth about things in a way
that's not just practical. Um And um having good
beliefs is the having normative beliefs, having reasonable beliefs
is supposed to be the best way of getting
to the truth. So that's a way in which
it's supposed to matter. Um We need to socially
coordinate ourselves with other people and to some extent
that requires having coordinations what we believe, who we
trust, who we don't trust, um about what topics
and stuff like that. And so um norms, you
can think of norms as rules that help us
all kind of get on the same page in
terms of how to form beliefs and who to
trust. So they play that kind of role. Um
So there's a bunch of different explanations for, um,
why it matters, uh to have good beliefs or
to have reasonable beliefs or to have justified beliefs.
Um, YOU know, in terms of practical success, in
terms of, you know, just getting the truth because
we care about it in terms of social coordinations,
stuff like that. And I think those are all
very reasonable answers. Um And so I don't wanna
say any one of them is the single correct
answer. I think they're probably also all true to
some extent. And so we need to think about
given uh these different explanations for the importance of
being reasonable or having good beliefs. What does it
mean? What, what should it mean to be reasonable
or have good beliefs?
But I think that there's perhaps a broader question
here that might have some bearing on what you
explore in the book. So, uh does the question
of whether anything really matters at all also have
any bearing here? Because I would imagine that, for
example, if you were talking to a radical skeptic
or a nihilist or someone along those lines, they
would just say, look who cares if anything is
true or not because, uh that doesn't even mean
anything. I mean, something along those lines.
Yeah. So this is, there's, there's a lot to
say here, but I'm gonna, I'll, I'll, I'll, uh,
I'm gonna skip a lot of it. Uh Maybe
you, so maybe nothing really matters. That's a, that's
an open possibility. Part of my approach to philosophy
is to try to, um when you, when you
write to only argue about the things you need
to argue about. So, in the book, I'm like,
hey, you know, some people think nothing really matters
for a variety of different reasons and uh I'm
not going to try to convince them otherwise. So
I think here's the thing to say, even if
nothing really matters in some sense of like, objectively,
nothing really matters or, you know, uh, in some
deep fundamental way, the universe doesn't care if we
live or die, whatever. Um Even if that's true,
which I'm not convinced by, um, things matter to
us, I mean, very, I mean, the, the very
limit things matter to me. Uh I suspect something
matters to you. Uh, AND it does seem like
things matter to us, at least to some significant
extent. And so even if nothing really matters, things
matter to us and what more could you want?
I mean, well, you could want things to really
matter. Uh, BUT if nothing can really matter, then
there's nothing more to want than what matters to
you. And then the question is, uh, I suspect,
well, not a question but I suspect if something
matters to you acting decently matters to you, achieving
your goals matters to you. Most people are curious
about some things, even if those things don't really
matter, this curiosity matters to them and So they
should, again, if there are norms or rules for
belief or standards for evaluating belief that are good
to conform to, in order to act, well, in
order to satisfy your curiosity, we want, it matters
to us that we know what those norms are,
that we figure out what those norms are. So
nothing needs to really matter as long as things
matter to us. And I think it's un without
a doubt, things matter to us.
So, but as long as something mattered to us,
we also have different sets of norms. So for
example, in the book, you focus on epistemic norms,
but we also have moral norms. So uh how
do you think we should approach things here if
there's, for example, a conflict between these two different
sets of norms or even if it's not moral
norms and the other kinds of norms that are
not epistemic.
Yeah. So this is the uh the notion of
mattering is a, is a, is a, is a
term I use throughout the book. And I partly
chose that because it wasn't a term that another
philosopher had already grasped on to and, and used
it for themselves. So I wanted to use it
for my own self. And part of what I,
what I'm thinking about when I talk about norms,
mattering is, is exactly this question of when two
norms conflict from different kind of domains. When you
know, it's you're curious about something but it would
make you unhappy to know the answer. So I'm
curious about whether or not there's intelligent life on
another planet. But if I found out there was
not, it would, I would be really bummed out.
Um, SO there's a, I mean, and that's true,
by the way I really wanted, I would still
really be curious but it would really be sad
to know the answer if the answer is no.
Um So there's a conflict there between what I'm
curious about in some sense was epidemically good. What
epidemic, you know, I want to know the truth.
But also uh what is good for me, we
call prudential sometimes was. So there's a conflict in
a prudential norm and we have this question, the
prudential norms say, don't believe there are no aliens
on other planets, no intelligent life, the maybe the
epistemic norms, they do believe it because that's what
my evidence tells me, let's say. So I have
this conflict and there's, then I have this question.
Well, what should I believe? Now? There's a really
boring set of answers which is, well, prudentially, you
should believe what prudence says and epidemically you should
believe what the epistemic norms say. And there's nothing
more to say and this is what people think.
There's nothing really matters. That's kind of what they're
trying to argue for is that there's nothing to
say other than there's the prudent answer. And the
epistemic answer, there's no more answers. And I just
think, well, there's at least the answer with in
this case, what's more important, what, what matters more
to me is that the epistemic stuff or the
prudential stuff? Uh And I think we can systematically
think about that. Um And so in normative conflicts,
you should follow the norm that matters more in
that case. That's the kind of, that's the sort
of schematic answer. Then the question is, well, what
norm matters more in that case? And in order
to think about that, we need to think really
deeply about why norms matter. Um And so, um
part of the goal of the book is to
say, let's try to figure out why epistemic norms
could matter because that will help us think about
how much they do matter. Um And because if
they don't matter at all, then every time it
makes me feel sad to believe the truth, I
should always ignore the truth because that would make
me sad. And I would think that would be
very surprising. Um So that doesn't really answer your
question because I haven't told you whether you should
ever believe the truth over being sad. You know,
that even if it makes you sad. But I
do think yes, but I don't actually answer that
question in the book. Uh What I wanna do
is say, let's think about how the epistemic norms
could be genuinely, really important and what that would
have to look like, but I don't try to
argue that they're, that they are more important than
other stuff in some cases. I think they almost
definitely are. I think there are pretty clearly cases
in which you should believe the truth, even though
it's upsetting. Um, EVEN though even in some cases
you should believe the truth, even if it's gonna
make you act worse. I think that's true sometimes.
Um, BUT I don't try to argue for that
in the book. Um I'm mostly trying to think
what would it have to look like if the
tic norms ever, epistemic norms ever could matter a
lot. Um But I don't try to argue, I
don't try to really like work out those conflicts
between them and other norms.
So another thing that you do in your book
is that you explore the difference between knowledge and
true belief and also then you go through different
kinds of beliefs. So, uh to start off with
what is the difference there between knowledge and true
belief?
Well, I don't know. Um I suspect nobody knows
we, I mean, that's a hu very hotly contested
debated area of philosophy. We don't know. I don't
think anybody knows, they think people have views. I
don't think anybody knows the difference between knowledge and
true belief completely. But what we do know is
there's these clear cases that are knowledge and there's
clear cases that are true beliefs but not knowledge.
So we, we know, these kind of clear difference
cases. So, I mean, the easy example is, um,
let's say, you know, I think what I ask
you what's my birthday and you're like, I don't
know, you just guess totally randomly unless say you
guess it, right. Um, BUT I don't tell you,
you just guess you form a belief in your
head totally randomly about what my birthday is and
you, you know, like, and you believe it even
if you got it, right? So you'd have a
true belief un controversially among, in, among philosophers, you
don't know my birthday. Um So that, but then
once I tell you what my birthday is, then
you do know it. So that's like kind of
a clear case, like guessing isn't gonna give you
knowledge even though it can give you true belief.
Um YOU know, forming beliefs in an unreasonable manner
isn't supposed to give you knowledge even though it
can sometimes you luck out and get true beliefs.
Um And then of course, what unreasonable means is
hotly contested as well. Um So I don't know
the difference between knowledge and true belief. And so
in the book, I have to talk about knowledge
a lot because knowledge is like one of the
most standard uh paradigmatic things that standard epistemology thinks
about. And that is so I have to criticize
how they think about knowledge because I want to
criticize standard epistemology, but I don't know what knowledge
is So I have to, like, focus on fairly
uncontroversial claims that everybody's gonna agree on about the
difference between knowledge and true belief.
And are there any pointless beliefs? And if so
what does it mean to call a belief? Uh,
POINTLESS.
Yeah. Almost every possible belief is pointless. That's a
real, that's a real bummer. Uh, SO pointless belief.
Uh, uh, IS a belief such that it basically
doesn't matter if you get it right or not.
So, I'll give you an example a fairly standard
example. So outside of, uh, there's a park across
the street from me and it's got a law,
it's got grass on that lawn. Um, I could
know it would be a real pain in the
neck, but I could know with a lot of
work how many blades of grass are in that
long, but it doesn't matter. That's like, not a
good thing to know. It's like, uh, even if
it was easy to know it, it wouldn't be
particularly valuable to know that. So, um, it, there
a belief about the number of blades in the
grass on the lawn can still be reasonable in
a very standard sense. It can fit my evidence.
Uh It can specify all the standard norms on,
on what is a good belief. It can be
knowledge, but it just doesn't matter one way or
the other if I just guessed how many blades
of grass on the lawn. So like even whether
or not if, I guess it totally unreasonably, who
cares. Uh And so that's an example of a
pointless belief. I have some other work prior to
the book where, um, I do, I'll, I do
some like proofs to show there's a limit to
the possible value of pointless beliefs effectively. Uh Either
they have no value or they're effectively infinitely small,
um infinitely little value. Um And I think that's
really important. So, and so first of all, that's
like just one example, but it turns out that
like when you think hard about pointless beliefs, which,
uh, it's weird to have a research project where
you have to think where you have to think
a lot about what's, what's not worth thinking about.
But that's my job. Uh Almost everything you could
possibly believe is pointless because did not be so
for every interesting question, there's a bunch of really
uninteresting related questions. Um So I think, I, I
think I use this example of the book, I
love my wife and I'm really interested in a
lot of things about her, but like, I could
count the, the hairs on her arm, I guess.
And that would give me some knowledge about my
wife, but I think that's pointless, right? And so
for almost every topic that we're interested in is
actually most of that topic is really kind of
boring. Um And so it just turns out the,
uh, there is really interesting stuff in the world
that we're genuinely curious about and that we should
be curious about probably. Um But most things are
not worth knowing and like provably not worth knowing.
Uh And there's some, I have some interesting proofs
uh in some of my earlier work. Uh And
so that's important, I think partly because it shows
us that just being knowledge is not enough to
make something particularly valuable, just being true is not
enough to make a belief, particularly valuable, just being
a fit fit to your evidence is not particularly
valuable. In fact, almost everything that you could believe
that was true and knowledge and fitted into your
evidence would be not particularly valuable. Um Because again,
it mostly be like little facts about how many
atoms in the wall behind me and like, you
know, how many miles between me and your, your
mother's best friend, you know, what was the phone
number of your grandparents in 1946? Stuff like that?
Right? There's all that facts out there that just
aren't, aren't particularly worth knowing. Um And so that
opens this question, like if just being knowledge or
just being reasonable in a standard sense of reasonable
or just being fitted to your evidence, that doesn't
make things good automatically because almost everything that does
that isn't good. And so then you're like, does
it ever make anything good? Is that really what's
important? Being knowledge, being reasonable, being true or is
there something else going on and that's kind of
got part of what got me started thinking about
this book,
but that's about pointless beliefs. But what are mundane
beliefs? Because that's another kind here, I guess.
Yeah. In the book, I talk about three categories
of belief and these are just sort of very
rough categories to kind of help frame thinking. Obviously
there's a lot of questions that, yeah. Anyway, it's
more complicated than this. But I, but I, but
you have to simplify things a little bit and,
and when you're writing so pointless beliefs, ba basically
don't matter at all. Um What I there's something
I call interesting beliefs, right? Those are ones that
like, it's good to know those. And then this
kind of middle category of mundane which are beliefs
that are worth the things that are kind of
uh important to. Uh, BUT only because they're useful
and if they weren't useful, they would be pointless.
Um And whereas the sort of interesting stuff is
uh important, kind of independent of its usefulness, it's
more important than it is useful. So, you know,
like, um, I know my wife's phone number, I
know my mom's phone number. But like, you know,
uh if I was somehow no longer able to
use that information, you know, if like aliens came
to earth and said, hey, Brian, we're just gonna
stop you from ever texting or calling your wife
ever again. I'd be really upset about that. But
it also would make that information useless to me.
Right. So, I wanna know my wife's phone number,
but if I couldn't use it, I wouldn't wanna
know it anymore. Or I wouldn't care if I
knew it one way or another. So that's, am
an example of mundane belief. It's worth a belief
that's worth having just because it's useful. And then
there's, this raises a set of issues which are
sometimes true beliefs are useful, but sometimes false beliefs
are about as useful as true beliefs. Um, SO,
you know, I wanna make salad later on, let's
say, and I want to put radishes in that
salad because I like radishes and I think I
got 37 radishes in my fridge. Well, if I
had 36 instead, that's probably still useful, that's probably
I'm still gonna act it basically the same. Uh,
I wanna know that I have, I want to
know something about those radishes but it doesn't need
to be like, strictly speaking true. That's actually not
a great example. But, uh, it's the simplest one
I could think of off the top of my
head. Uh There's some really interesting complicated examples in
ethics. Actually, in legal philosophy, this comes up all
the time. So in legal philosophy, a very common
view of the law is that one function of
the law is to give us advice. But in
order to give us advice, the law sometimes has
to be a little bit more simple than reality
is if the law was as perfectly, it was
so complicated that it was perfectly matching the reality
in every possible case, it would be too complicated
to understand. You couldn't use it. So, fairly common
in view of the law is that the law
has to be kind of like a slightly dumbed
down version of, um, morality. And if that's right,
then the law sometimes gives you bad advice. But
in the long run, it's supposed to, if it
does its job, it's supposed to give you, uh,
you're supposed to do better on a very standard
view. Follow. If the law is well made, you'll
do better in the long run following the law
than you will sort of thinking for yourself in
every possible case. That's a controversial view. You don't
have to believe that, but it's a pretty common
view of what good law looks like. And so
in that case, if you believe the law, uh,
you would be, you would act better in the
long run, but your belief would be slightly false
would be a little bit off because the law
is oversimplified. So that's a case in which, uh,
you might do better with a oversimplified belief that
you can use, but which is slight, which is
strictly speaking false, you would act better using that,
that false belief than you would if you had
a totally true belief because it be the true
belief would be too complicated to use. Uh And
so then we have this question if sometimes, if,
what, what we care about from mundane places, their
usefulness and false beliefs can sometimes be as or
more useful than true beliefs. Why the, then we
wouldn't always really wanna have true beliefs in mundane
contexts, sometimes false beliefs would be just as good
and then epistemic norms as we generally understand them
are all about the truth. But then they're not
really well matched to mundane the youth, the value
of mundane beliefs because mundane beliefs about usefulness, truth
and usefulness can come apart. So the epistemic norms
that they're standardly understood are not tracking what we
really are interested in what we really want out
of mundane beliefs.
So I, I want to ask you about non-standard
epistemic norms. We've already talked a little bit about
the standard epistemic norms. You gave a few examples
earlier. But before we get into that specifically, could
you tell us about this idea of epistemic consequentialism?
What is that?
Yeah. So in ethics, consequentialism is the view that
basically what you, what what you should do is
determined by what produces the best long run consequences.
And very roughly epidemic consequentialism is that idea. But
in epistemology, so it's like what you should believe
uh is determined by the consequences of those beliefs.
So the epidemic consequences. So like what you should
believe is determined by uh what the rules are,
the norms for belief are determined by uh what
norms are best for you to follow in terms
of getting, have informed, having good beliefs. So, if
you follow these norms in the long run, you'll
have better beliefs than if you don't follow these
norms.
And how does that connect them to non-standard epistemic
norm?
Well, so uh the discussion and epistemology, at least
historically uh has looked consequential. So people say, why
does it matter that my beliefs are reasonable? Uh
Why does it matter that? I believe what my
evidence tells me? And the answer is supposed to
be, if you do that, you're more gonna have
more true beliefs than you would if you didn't
do that. So it looks consequentialist, you're justifying, you're
explaining the norms in terms of, you're gonna get
true beliefs, you follow norms. But of course, uh
there are gonna be cases in which forming one
false belief is potentially going to give you more
true beliefs in the long run. So use the,
the law example I just gave, uh, let's as,
let's assume that the law is well made, not
a good assumption in many countries, but let's assume
that we live in a country where the law
is well made. And so, uh the average citizen
who just believes what the law tells them, who
just believe the law is right, is gonna act
better more often than if they use their own
judgment. Um If that's right, then believing that the
law is correct is false because the law is
not entirely correct. If you just believe the laws
inside you believe the law is entirely correct, that's
a false belief. But that, having that false belief
will give you more true beliefs in the long
run about what you should do in particular situations.
It'll give you more true beliefs than having the
true belief. That law is incorrect. Um, IF that's
right again, there's a lot of ifs there. But
we can just imagine that's true. If that were
true for a person, then forming one false belief
about that, the law is always correct will give
them more true beliefs in the long run than
if they'd formed the true belief that the law
is not entirely correct. So that would be what
I called the trade off, uh was often called
a trade off. You form one false belief because
having that false belief will give you more true
beliefs in the long run. And if you're an
epidemic, consequentialist, you should say, yeah, that sounds great.
But uh everybody who is an epidemic, almost everybody
who's an epidemic, consequentialist has tried to deny that
this is a consequence of their view. Um So
not every single person the last couple of years,
like for example, Richard Pettigrew said, yeah, maybe we
could be OK with that. Um But historically, people
who are epidemic consequentialist have tried to deny that
tradeoffs are we should make tradeoffs. Uh But it
looks like a natural fit that you should say,
forming a false belief, gives you more true beliefs
in the long run. That's the right thing to
do according to consequentialism. But people want to deny
this. Um That's one aspect of it really, really
quickly. Also epidemic consequentialist in contemporary work tend to
be like maximizer which means that you should form
the best beliefs. You can. And uh I think
that is the wrong approach in epistemology. You should
be a satisfy or uh what's called scalar consequentialist.
That's a view that comes from Alison Norcross mostly
uh and satisfying and scalar consequentialist don't think you
should always believe what's best. Um And if that's
right, you, it causes all these really difficult problems
for contemporary consequential theories.
And in the book, sort of related to that,
you also talk about epistemic tradeoffs, what are those?
And how do they apply to these discussions surrounding
non-standard epistemic norms?
Yeah. So tradeoffs are cases in which you form
one belief that is bad in some way uh
in order to form other because it's likely to
benefit you in terms of producing other good beliefs.
So forming a bad belief about what you should
like about uh some rule for action might uh
give you more good beliefs about how to act
in the long run. Or another example uh from
the book, uh John Doris has this uh uh
work where he argues that having false beliefs about,
uh, your behavior and your personal relationships can lead
you to act better in the long run. Also
very depressing. Um, AND, uh, if he's right, then
it may be that those false beliefs about, um,
about the relationship can also lead to other true
beliefs about how to act well in your relationship.
By the way. Could you give us an example
of that?
No, that's, that's, that's John's work. So that's, that's,
I don't know that, I don't know, that works
well enough. Um I'll give you a more an
example. I do know a little bit better. Um
There is some research that suggests that overconfident academics
publish better. Um So, and there's some reason to
think that thinking you're a better researcher than you,
in fact, are that you're more capable than you,
in fact, are leads to more discoveries. So that'd
be a way in which forming a belief that's
false thinking. You're a better researcher than you really
are. This is not only false, it probably goes
against your evidence. Um, UNREASONABLE belief. Uh That's one
bad belief you can form, but if you form
that bad belief, you're somewhat more likely to learn
things in the future. And if that's true, you've
traded off, you've sacrificed your belief about your abilities.
You had this one's bad for the benefit of
these other long term benefits in terms of learning
other new thing, other interesting things. Sorry. One second,
it's probably, it's probably basically the idea that if
I think I'm not good enough to become, I
don't know, an academic, for example, it's even pointless
for me to study or to uh apply to
it.
Right. Yeah. So this is, of course, that's an
empirical question. Like what actually works. So I'm a
philosopher, not a, not a scientist. So I can't
tell you if it's really true, that being overconfident
will help you. But if it is true, then
uh that would be a epistemic trade off. If
being overconfident helped you learn new things, that would
be a trade off where you're sacrificing one belief
and making that bad in order to get other
good things. And yeah, I think it's plausible although
again, I don't think it's been studied well enough
that we can be 100% certain, but it's an
interesting example to think about.
So tell us now about the methodology that you,
you use in the book when it comes to
trying to come up with rep what you, you
call replacement norms.
Yeah. So um methodology is basically start with what
uh people have said um their explanations they've given
for why the epistemic norms are supposed to matter.
So for example, the consequentialist explanation, which is the
epidemic norms are supposed to matter because if we
conform to them, we form more good beliefs or
um there's a social view that says the epistemic
norms are supposed to matter because if we all
sort of follow the same rules. We can better
figure out who to listen to and who not
listen to or the action view, which is that
if we uh have good beliefs, that's gonna be
good for action in various ways. So each chapter
of the book or many of the chapters start
with, this is what philosophers said about why the
epic norms are supposed to matter. Let's just assume
they're right. And then ask what would norms that
do what these people are talking about look like?
So what would norms that uh produce better action
look like? What would norms that enable good social
coordinations look like? Um And we don't, so typically,
that's assumed that these, these stories are gonna um
vindicate uh the norms that we typically accept in
philosophy, but I don't assume that. So I say,
let's just take this the, the answer very seriously,
the idea very seriously. Let's not assume anything about
what the norms actually do look like and just
say if you started from this idea and you
just went, what would you get?
And what do you think would be some of
the biggest objections to the kind of way you
approach things here basically to your methodology?
Yeah. Um So I've gotten different objections from different
people. Um One objection is the epistemic norms aren't
supposed to matter. So who cares? Um That, that
always makes that, that always makes me a little
bit sad if they don't matter why are we
thinking about them so much? Um So another objection
is even if I'm right in a sense, the,
the, the non-standard norms that I'm interested in, we
can't follow them. So, for example, we can't, like,
intentionally form false beliefs. If, even if that's gonna
give us true beliefs in the long run, that's
a pretty standard view. Like, even if you knew
that being overconfident was gonna give you more, would
help you out in the long run. You can't
just make yourself overconfident on that basis. Uh Some
people think that's impossible. And so there are, people
are like, well, so then, so what um if
we can't follow these norms, they, they're not that
they're not the right norms. That's like probably the
most uh common uh objection. Yeah. And then it
sort of, I guess one other objection is just
uh people have cared about knowledge and justified belief
in the sort of standard sense for all of
history, uh All of philosophical history. So there's no
way I can, I can be right. I can't.
So I'm saying they've always been mistaken. Uh So
I must be wrong because I'm disagreeing with Plato
uh for and everybody else. So that's a, I
think a very reasonable objection. Um
uh And, and I mean, how would you reply
to those objections? I mean, do you think that
at least uh those people would have a point
or not?
Yeah. So I mean, I think it's, I do
think it's a very reasonable worry if you disagree
with everybody, it's good evidence that you're wrong. Um,
BUT I think, um, the approach that I'm taking
to these questions is an approach that I don't
think people have taken uh enough previously. And so,
um, yeah, so there's all this work outside of
epistemology on why norms matter. Right. So again, I
do a lot of uh work in ethics and
legal philosophy. And, you know, in legal philosophy, people
thought about all they always think about, there are
the laws and then there are the justification for
the laws. And if the, if the justification for
the laws doesn't actually mean the laws are good,
then we should change the law, right? Um And
so, and same thing, ethics, we thought a lot
about like why uh people thought a lot about
why it's good to be ethical in various ways.
And so what I've really tried to do in
the book is take these ideas that are these,
these discussions from outside of epistemology about the nature
of social norms or the nature of respect or
the nature of consequentialism, all the stuff and bring
them into epistemology in a way that I don't
think has been done as much previously as it
should have. And so it does give you surprising
results. Um But I don't think that is a
devastating problem because um if everybody's dis if I'm
disagreeing with everybody, but they haven't been approaching things
in this way that I'm thinking about things. Um
And by the way, I should say, I'm not
disagreeing with literally every everybody, not literally everybody, I'm
not the only person to have questioned uh sort
of standard technology. Quite a few people have done
that. So, like, I don't want to say, I'm
like the pi I, I'm not even a pioneer,
I'm like following in the footsteps of a lot
of really important philosophers. Uh So I should, I
don't want to puff myself up too much, but
I'm disagreeing with a lot of people. Um And
so I think it's not surprising because I uh
I'm trying to bring a method to this discussion
that has not been used often enough. And so
uh it's not surprising that people have gotten different
results because they haven't as much used. Uh The
method I'm using again, other people have, I'm not
the only person I've done it this way. But
um um most people don't, don't do purchasing this
way. And then there's this other question like, well,
if we can't do this, uh then why does
it matter? Um And it's true, I don't think
we can, you can't just like just um most
of the time you can't just decide to believe
something. Um But you can do things to try
to cultivate uh a character that means you'll believe,
have better beliefs. Um Even if you can't choose
in any particular situation what to believe. You can
are like, there's reasons I think you can cultivate
being the kind of person that will believe the
kinds of things you should believe. And then uh
so it still can be interesting to think how
we cultivated in ourselves, the right kind of character
to believe the right things. And then of course,
we want to know what are the right things
to believe.
And so what kinds of replacement norms do you
suggest?
Um It's gonna depend on why the epistemic norms
are supposed to matter. So again, the norms that
would be the right norms if all we care
about is acting well, are gonna be different from
the norms that uh if we partly care about
satisfying our curiosity. Um BECAUSE acting well is more
disconnected from the truth, more often than curiosity, whereas
curiosity is often about the pursuit of truth. Um
So it's really gonna depend on what the right
answer to the question is. Why did the epidemic
no matter in the first place? And I, since
I think there's a lot of different good answers
to that question, I can't sort of univocity say
what should replace it. But I have some general
thoughts. Every view about why the norms matter is
gonna tell us that sometimes we should make tradeoffs.
Sometimes you should form one bad belief in order
to form the benefit in other uh epidemically relevant
ways. Um WHEN you should form tradeoffs is gonna
vary depending on what the good real epidemic good
is supposed to be. But all the, all the
views I consider end up saying you should make
tradeoffs sometimes which are hugely controversial. So that's part
of the interest of the book. So the Replacement
Norms, the ones that are gonna be the right
norms are gonna say make trade off sometimes. Um
And then the other thing is the standard asemic
norms, say never contradict yourself, never believe anything that's
like clearly against your evidence, stuff like that, never
believe anything is clearly false. And the replacement norms
aren't gonna agree with that. So they'll say you
should contradict yourself if that's helpful in the long
run, you should believe false things if that's helpful
in the long run, but also sometimes believing false
things is good enough. Um uh We don't have
to have perfect beliefs, we can have beliefs that
are good enough. Uh And I think that's gonna
be true basically on every view, although what counts
as good enough and when, when a false belief
can be good enough is gonna depend on what
view. So it's not like a, an abdication of
the truth. The truth is really important in a
lot of contexts. Um But um getting completely to
the truth is not always as important in every
context, you can get close to the truth of
all the, you know. So here's the truth and
here's like all the false things you could believe
sometimes being like right here really close to the
truth, but still wrong is good enough and, you
know, it's gonna depend from situation to situation. Um
But um I think all the replacement norms are
gonna say sometimes getting close enough to the truth
is good enough and then in pointless cases, being
far from the truth is probably fun in a
lot of cases. Um So, yeah, so all the
replacement norms are gonna say, make trade off sometimes.
And I think they're all gonna say you don't
need to get all the way to the truth
in every possible situation. And that's a fairly radical
view in philosophy.
I mean, it's fairly radical but isn't it more
realistic to assume that most of the beliefs we
have are just at best good enough? I mean,
even when it comes to most of the knowledge
that is out there to be acquired, I mean,
first of all, I guess we don't even have
enough time to process all that information and then
to form uh correct beliefs or true beliefs. But
then, I mean, even as we move along, as,
I mean, as time passes, we, as humanity keep
acquiring more and more knowledge that we don't have
yet have there to, to learn about, you
know, I, I think that's definitely right. Um And
this is actually a thing I'm, I'm in my
upcoming work, I'm really interested in. So one thing
people could say in response to what you're saying,
so I'm very sympathetic with this view. People could
say, well, it's true that like, as a whole,
we don't, we don't really have, like, we can
always improve as a whole, but they might say
individual beliefs are either true or false and individual
beliefs can be knowledge or not. And so, you
know, even if we keep making progress, like at
the holistic level, they would say, don't, you shouldn't
believe something if it's not true yet, like if
you don't know the truth, don't believe it um
about individual things. And they say, well, you can
know individual things and you get the truth about
individual things, even if we keep progressing as a
whole. Uh But I actually think this kind of
emphasis on individual bits of knowledge and truth is
often a mistake and we should be kind of
emphasizing like kind of collective kind of. Uh SO
are kind of big picture holistic um set of
beliefs. Uh What I in the book called The
Picture of the world around us. Um I think
that might be really what's more important than that.
That is what you're saying is 100% applies to
that as we acquire new information, our picture gets
better and better and better. But like, it's definitely
as a whole picture never gonna be completely accurate.
And so we have to think if we kind
of evaluate our kind of picture of the world
as a whole. We can't hold it up to
this ideal standard because we're never gonna get there.
Um And we have to say, was it, what
does it mean for the picture of the world?
It's a holistic thing to be good enough. And
I actually think that's the right way of thinking.
I suspect that's the right way of thinking about
epidemic values, kind of more holistically than atomically, rather
not about individual beliefs, but about kind of collective
sets of beliefs.
So one final question then are epistemic norms categorical?
And what does it mean for them to be
categorical? What does that word mean here?
Um Well, here's what I think it means. And
then you can tell me if that's what if
that's what you think it means. Uh WHEN philosophers
talk about non being categorical, they typically wanna say
something like it applies to everybody at all times,
regardless of their desires and interests. Is that kind
of what you had in mind?
Yeah, that's usually what I think about when someone
mentions that word.
Yeah. So our episode of norms, categorical, it depends.
Uh So it again depends on the function of
epistemic norms. So I think moral norms are categorical.
And if you think that the, that the moral
norms kind of involve uh have implications for what
we should believe, then the epistemic, then at least
some epistemic norms will be categorical because they'll be
derivative of the moral norms. But if you think
the epistemic norms also have to do with satisfying
our curiosity. Um, THEN you might think, well, whether
or not they're categorical, then depends on if there
are sort of categorical requirements and what we should
be curious about. So if you think there are
certain things that everybody ought to be curious about
and that, then they're gonna be categorical requirements on
what you should think about and how you should
think about it in order to satisfy that curiosity,
but I'm not convinced of that. I think that's
an open question. Uh And if curiosity is more
subjective and like just you get to be curious
about whatever you're curious about, then, then there wouldn't
be any categorical norms that are connected to curiosity.
So it depends a lot on sort of what,
what the end of epistemology really is. If it's
about morality, if it's about action, if it's about
curiosity, if it's about something else, the category, uh
the categorical nature is just gonna kind of come
along with that.
A and so that would be what in your
mind, it would determine whether they should or shouldn't
be categorical, is that it?
Yeah, you figure out what is supposed to, why
they're supposed to matter first and then you can
answer the question of whether or not they're categorical.
Great. So the book is again the end of
epistemology as we know it, I'm leaving a link
to it in the description of the interview and
Dr Talbot just before we go apart from the
book, would you like to tell people where they
can find you and your work on the internet?
Yeah. Uh Doctor Brian talbot.com/philosophy. Um Yeah, doctor and,
and if you just, if you Google Brian Talbot
philosophy, you're gonna find me pretty quickly. So
great. So thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
fun to talk with you.
Thank you. It's my pleasure. Thanks for having me.
I appreciate it.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
be no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Conners, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall.
Her ma J and Lain Jung Y and the
Samuel K. Hes Mark Smith, J. Tom Hummel s
friends, David Sloan Wilson, Yasa dear. Roman Roach Diego,
Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt,
Pavlo Stassi Na Me, Gary G Alman, Sam of
Z Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall,
Eden Broder Douglas Fry Franca Gilon Cortez or Solis
Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio,
Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo
David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fists, Larry Dey
Junior, Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur by
Robert Grassy Zorn. Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick
Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley
Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week in the B
brand Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentine
Steinman, Perros Kate Von Goler, Alexander Albert Liam Dan
Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner Urla. Good
enough Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers, these our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina, Tom
Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon Bendik Muller Thomas
Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman Negro, Nick
Ortiz and Nick Golden and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergi, Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank
you for all.